# ijo
`Be Consistent`

The goal of ijo is to try and design a programming language that do not rely on any keywords while still being easily
readable and tries to feel familiar with programmers coming from C-style programming languages like C, C++, C#, Java, Swift, etc.

Here are some of the features that ijo tries to provide:
- Dynamic typing
- Static typing can be enforced
- Functions are first class
- Multi paradigm
- Object Orientation through Prototypes

Since ijo tries to do away with symbols it must `Be Consistent` as much as possible. To achieve that, it tries to limit as much as possible
the multiple meaning for the same piece of code. ijo tries to have the same pattern meaning the same thing and behaving in the same way in the different contexts it finds itself in.

Here are the different mantras of ijo. What it tries to follow by heart:
- Be consistent
- Be easy to read
- Be familiar

With those mantras in mind, can you guess and more importantly understand every pieces of the code below.
<small>Syntax highlight is intentionaly disabled. The language should be readable without it.</small>

```text
$main = () -> Int {
    writeLine("Hello ijo!");

    $name = "Jonathan";
    $feeling = :good;

    write("My name is \(name) and ");

    ?(feeling == :hungry) {
        writeLine("I could go eat a fruit right now");
    } ?(feeling == :good) {
        writeLine("I'm feeling good");
    } ?() {
        writeLine("I have no feelings");
    }

    $sheeps = 0;
    ~(:true) {
        ?(sheeps < 5) {
            writeLine("\(sheeps) sheeps");
        } ?() {
            write("zZzZzzZ");
        }

        ?(sheeps == 10) {
            <-;
        }
        sheeps += 1;
    }

    writeLine("\nOh sorry, I fell asleep");
}
```

{{< expandable label="The solution" >}}
```
Hello ijo!
My name is Jonathan and I'm feeling good
0 sheeps
1 sheeps
2 sheeps
3 sheeps
4 sheeps
zZzZzzZzZzZzzZzZzZzzZzZzZzzZzZzZzzZzZzZzzZ
Oh sorry, I fell asleep
```
{{</ expandable >}}

If you understood everything from the code above without having previous knowledge of ijo, then great. It means my goals
were achieved. Even if you're the only one to succeed.

For the others that might have difficulty to understand, fear not! For the next chapters will go more in the inner working of the language.

[Variables](01.Variables.md)