# Variables
## Declaring a variable
In ijo the symbol `$` is used to declare something. It can be a variable, a function or a custom type.
It basically replaces the different keywords found in other languages like `var`, `let`, `func`, `class`, `enum` or the constructs like `int name;`

In ijo we would have the following:
```ijo
// Declares a variable named 'name' which is a String with value "Jonathan"
$name = "Jonathan";

// Declares a variable named 'age' which is a Number but has no value yet
$age = 27;

// Declares a variable named 'country' which is a Symbol with value :France
$country = :France;
```
Being a dynamically typed language, ijo will infer the type of the variables based on the expression on the right hand side of the expression following the variable name declaration.

### Variables without values
In the previous example, we directly assigned values to the variables but sometimes you want to do the following (example in C#):
```C#
Result result;

if (age < 18) {
    result = Result.CannotEnter;
} else {
    result = Result.Ok;
}
```

This example is a little bit convoluted and could be improved, but it shows that sometimes you know you need a variable of one type, but
don't know what value to assign at the moment of its creation. Previously, we directly assigned a value to the different variables we declared and let ijo infer their types from the right hand side of the '=' symbol.

{{ note }}
The '=' symbol is the assignment operator. It assign the value on its right to the expression on its left.
{{ /note }}

When you want to declare a variable or parameter of a function is of a certain type you will use the ':' symbol. Here is that same example, but written in ijo.

```ijo
$result: Result;

?(result < 18) {
    result = Result.CannotEnter;
} ?() {
    result = Result.Ok;
}
```

## Variables types
Here are the different variables types in ijo:
- Number: `1`, `-53`, `420.69`, `-0.00032`, etc
- Char: `'a'`, `'b'`, `'3'`, `'!'`, `'_'`, `' '`, `'\n'` etc
- String: `"This is some text"`, `" And this is another string."`
- Symbols: `:France`, `:North`, `:South`, `:eAsT`
- Booleans: `:true`, `:false` or `true`, `false`
- Array/Lists: `["Apple", :Banana, 42]`
- HashMap/Dictionary: `%["Fruit" = :Banana, :age = 27, 1 = :TheNumberOne]`
- Enums: `|:North, :South, :East, :West|`
- User types: They can be thought of objects in other programming languages. A full chapter is dedicated to them.

### Numbers
Numbers in ijo are represented by a `double` type, which mean that there are (almost) no differences between `1.0` and `1`.

### Char
Char represent a single ASCII character.

### String
A String is a type that consists of multiple characters. They are kind of like an array of Char.

### Symbols
A symbol is sometimes called an interned string. This means that it is an identifier which value is itself and will never change.
They are the same as numbers, but for words. The differences between a symbol and a string are:
- A symbol is always constant, it cannot and will not change.
- There are no operations on a symbol except for comparisons.
- They are case sensitive: `:East` and `':east'` are different.

### Booleans
Every programming language need some ways to tell that something is true or not. This is usually done through a boolean. A type that can have only two values: `true` and `false`.

Even though the goal with ijo is to have no keywords in its syntax, booleans is one aspect of the language where the rule will not be followed.
Here are the reasons why:
- It would be impossible to handle the translated values of `true` and `false` in every natural languages that exist.
- We could find a way to represent true and false with symbols, but:
    1. I didn't find one
    2. Readability would be hindered
- Readability would be worse.

That last point is the most important reason why it has been decided that the symbols `:true` and `:false` would be the symbols returned by default where `true` and `false` are used in other programming language.

For the sake of keeping the language familiar with other languages, in the risk of slightly breaking the `Be Consistent` mantra, `true` and `false` are also accepted to represent boolean values.

So the following codes work:
```ijo
:true == true; // :true
:true == false; // :false
:true == :true; // :true
:true == :false; // :false

$sameNumber = (42 == 42);
sameNumber == :true; // :true
```
It is recommended to use the symbols version to represent booleans and that's what will be used in this book.

### Arrays/Lists
Arrays or Lists are a collections of items that can be any valid ijo types.
They are represented by the following syntax: `[:item1, "item2", item3, ]`.

{{ note }}
Here item3 can reference a declared variable somewhere else in the code.
{{ /note }}

### HashMap/Dictionaries
Just like Arrays, Map/Dictionaries are a collection of items, but those items are a pair of Key and Value. Both the key and
value can be any valid ijo types.

They are represented by: `%["Key" = value, :AnotherKey = :anotherValue, 42 = "A Number"]`.
The syntax `%[]` is inspired by the Elixir programming language which defines the same structure with `%{}`.

Even though HashMap and Arrays are different, they are types that can be iterated on or usually provide a way to iterate on their keys or values.
As one of the goal of ijo is to be consistent, it has been decided that `[]` will show the intent that you are manipulating a type that can be iterated. The reason for having the `%` symbol in front of `[]` is also to clearly show the intention behind the type and that what follows is
a key/value pair. Thus having `[:someValue = :aSymbol]` will yield compilation error as it was deemed too prone to error if now `[]` could represent two fundamentally different types.

You might have noted that unlike Elixir, PHP or other languages, the association does not use the `key => value` or `key: value` syntaxes, but `key = value`.
Reasons:
- Introducing a new symbol `=>` seemed unnecessary.
- `key: value` would have been difficult to read when using symbols: `:key : :value`, `:key: :value` or worse `:key::value`
- To `Be Consistent`

Usually when we use a HashMap, it is to **assign** a *value* to a *key* and if you remember, in the introduction it was stated that: 
> ijo tries to have the same pattern mean the same thing and behaving in the same way in the different contexts it finds itself in.

Since we are **assigning** a value to something, it seemed natural and logical to just reuse the '=' symbol for that purpose here.
```ijo
$frenchTranslation = %[
    :hello => "Bonjour", // Assign the value "Bonjour" to the key :hello
    :bye => "Au revoir", // Assign the value "Au revoir" to the key :bye
    "When pigs can fly" => "Quand les poules auront des dents" // I guess you got the idea how by now
];
```

### Enums
Enums are types that can be enumerated.
<small>*Such clever*</small>.

They are declared with the following syntax: `| case1, :case2 |`. As you can see they can be composed of either an identifier or a symbol.
There are differences between the two cases, but you'll learn more about it in the Enum chapter.

You know the drill, the reasons for the syntax:
In certain languages enums can act as flags in which case the syntax can be something similar to:
```typescript
type textDecoration = TextDecoration.Bold | TextDecoration.Italic;
```
or
```c
if (flag == BOLD | ITALIC) {
    // Do something
}
```

So because the symbol `|` can be associated with enumeration it has been decided to use it to show the intention that the variable is an enum.

